>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 31: AMERICAN
OFFICIALS INVESTIGATE A POSSIBLE
RUSSIAN HACK OF ONE STATE'S
ELECTRIC UTILITY.
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS, AND HOW
IT AFFECTS REPORTERS WHO COVER
CONFLICTS AND DISASTERS.
AND, RINGING IN THE NEW YEAR.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
VERMONT'S ELECTRIC GRID APPEARS
TO HAVE BEEN A TARGET OF RUSSIAN
HACKING, AN EFFORT ONE VERMONT
CONGRESSMAN TODAY CALLED
"SYSTEMIC, RELENTLESS, AND
PREDATORY."
VERMONT'S GOVERNOR SAYS ALL
AMERICANS SHOULD BE ALARMED AND
OUTRAGED THAT THE SAME MALWARE
CODE ASSOCIATED WITH RUSSIAN
HACKS OF DEMOCRATIC PARTY
SERVERS EARLIER THIS YEAR HAS
BEEN DETECTED ON A COMPUTER AT A
VERMONT UTILITY.
BURLINGTON ELECTRIC, ONE OF THE
STATE'S TWO LARGEST UTILITIES,
CONFIRMED YESTERDAY THAT THE
MALWARE WAS ON A LAPTOP NOT
CONNECTED TO ITS GRID SYSTEMS,
AND NO OPERATIONS WERE
DISRUPTED.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY HAD WARNED UTILITIES
ONLY THE DAY BEFORE THAT RUSSIAN
MALWARE MAY HAVE INFILTRATED
THEIR SYSTEMS.
NOW TRAVELING IN UKRAINE, U.S.
SENATOR JOHN McCAIN, THE
CHAIRMAN OF THE SENATE ARMED
SERVICES COMMITTEE, HAS
SCHEDULED A HEARING NEXT
THURSDAY IN WASHINGTON ABOUT
RUSSIAN HACKING.
>> WHEN YOU ATTACK A COUNTRY,
IT'S AN ACT OF WAR, AND SO WE
HAVE TO MAKE SURE THAT THERE IS
A PRICE TO PAY, SO THAT WE CAN
PERHAPS PERSUADE RUSSIANS TO
STOP THIS KIND OF ATTACKS
ON OUR VERY FUNDAMENTALS OF
DEMOCRACY.
>> Stewart: IN RETALIATION FOR
THE ELECTION HACKS, PRESIDENT
OBAMA ON THURSDAY IMPOSED NEW
SANCTIONS AGAINST RUSSIA AND
EXPELLED 35 RUSSIAN OFFICIALS
FROM THE UNITED STATES.
THE UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL TODAY UNANIMOUSLY
APPROVED A RESOLUTION THAT
ENDORSES THE LATEST NATIONWIDE
CEASEFIRE IN SYRIA, BROKERED BY
RUSSIA AND TURKEY.
THE RESOLUTION CALLS FOR THE
IMMEDIATE DISTRIBUTION OF
HUMANITARIAN AID, AND MAY PAVE
THE WAY FOR PEACE TALKS IN
KAZAKHSTAN NEXT MONTH.
THE U.N. PLANS SEPARATE SYRIA
PEACE TALKS IN GENEVA IN
FEBRUARY.
REBEL GROUPS HAD THREATENED TO
ABANDON THE TWO-DAY-OLD
CEASEFIRE, BUT DESPITE SCATTERED
VIOLATIONS, IT APPEARED TO BE
HOLDING.
ISIS HAS CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY
FOR TODAY'S DOUBLE SUICIDE
BOMBING IN BAGHDAD.
IRAQI OFFICIALS SAY THE
COORDINATED ATTACKS KILLED AT
LEAST 28 PEOPLE AND INJURED MORE
THAN 50 OTHERS.
THE FIRST SUICIDE BOMBER,
WEARING AN EXPLOSIVES-LADEN
BELT, BLEW HIMSELF UP AT A
CROWDED MARKET.
AND MINUTES LATER, AS CROWDS
WERE GATHERING, THE SECOND
BOMBER STRUCK.
CHINA, THE WORLD'S BIGGEST
MARKET FOR IVORY, SAYS IT WILL
BAN IVORY SALES BY THE END OF
THE COMING NEW YEAR.
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION GROUPS
HAIL THE MOVE AS A "GAME
CHANGER" FOR AFRICA'S ENDANGERED
ELEPHANTS.
POACHERS SLAUGHTER 20,000
ELEPHANTS EVERY YEAR FOR THEIR
IVORY TUSKS.
BUT CHINESE-RULED HONG KONG, A
MAJOR HUB FOR THE IVORY TRADE,
PLANS TO TAKE LONGER TO PHASE IT
OUT-- UNTIL 2021.
THE U.S. ADOPTED A NEAR-TOTAL
BAN ON IVORY SALES IN JUNE.
>> Stewart: YESTERDAY ON THE
NEWSHOUR, WE REPORTED THE NUMBER
OF U.S. LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
KILLED IN THE LINE OF DUTY THIS
YEAR: 64, UP FROM 56 LAST YEAR.
TODAY, WE TAKE A LOOK AT THE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE KILLED BY
POLICE OFFICERS.
THIS YEAR THE NUMBER IS 957
PEOPLE, DOWN SLIGHTLY FROM 991
IN 2015, BUT STILL A VERY LARGE
NUMBER.
IT IS APPROXIMATELY THREE PEOPLE
A DAY, ACCORDING TO REPORTING
DONE BY THE "WASHINGTON POST."
ACCORDING TO THE "POST," WHITE
MEN ACCOUNTED FOR THE MOST
DEATHS, ROUGHLY HALF OF THEM.
HOWEVER, WHEN POPULATION RATES
WERE FACTORED IN, BLACK MEN WERE
THREE TIMES AS LIKELY TO BE
KILLED BY POLICE AND THEY
ACCOUNTED FOR A THIRD OF THE
UNARMED KILLED.
KIMBRIELL KELLY IS ONE OF THE
AUTHORS OF THIS YEAR-END REPORT
AND WAS PART OF THE TEAM THAT
WON A PULITZER PRIZE FOR ITS
COVERAGE OF POLICE SHOOTINGS.
SHE JOINS ME NOW FROM
WASHINGTON.
KIMBRIELL, THIS IS THE SECOND
YEAR THE "WASHINGTON POST" HAS
TRACKED THESE NUMBERS.
WHAT HAVE BEEN THE MOST
NOTICEABLE DIFFERENCES FROM
2015 TO 2016?
>> ONE OF THE BIGGEST
DIFFERENCES IS THAT THE NUMBER
OF INCIDENTS THAT ARE CAUGHT ON
VIDEO.
YOU SEE ABOUT A 63% INCREASE IN
THE DEATHS THAT OCCURRED THIS
YEAR THAT WERE CAPTURED EITHER
ON OFFICERS' BODY CAMERAS OR BY
BYSTANDERS.
AND SO WE SEE THAT THERE HAS
BEEN AN INCREASE OVER THE LAST
TWO YEARS, BUT WE KNOW THAT
THERE'S AN INCREASE, ALSO, IN
THE NUMBER OF POLICE DEPARTMENTS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
THERE ARE ROUGHLY 18,000
DEPARTMENTS, AND FROM WHAT WE
UNDERSTAND, NEARLY HALF OF THEM
HAVE OFFICERS THAT ARE EQUIPPED
WITH BODY-WORN CAMERAS.
AND THAT'S IMPORTANT
INFORMATION, TOO, NOT JUST IN
DOCUMENTING THESE INCIDENTS, BUT
IN THE PROSECUTIONS OF OFFICERS
AS WELL, IF THEY ARE
INVESTIGATED.
>> Stewart: NOW, THE F.B.I.
ALSO KEEPS TRACK OF THESE
NUMBERS, BUT THEIR NUMBERS ARE
NEARLY HALF OF THE "POST'S"
REPORTING.
WHY IS THAT?
>> AND THAT'S ONE THING THAT WE
HAD FOUND AS WELL.
FOR THE FIRST YEAR-- THOSE
NUMBERS ARE VOLUNTARILY
REPORTED.
SO POLICE DEPARTMENTS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY AREN'T REQUIRED TO GIVE
THAT INFORMATION TO THE F.B.I.,
AND SO WHAT WE FOUND IN OUR TWO
YEARS OF REPORTING IS THAT THE
NUMBER IS STILL ABOUT 1,000
FATALITIES A YEAR, BUT THAT OUR
NUMBER IS TWO TIMES THE NUMBER
THAT THE F.B.I. IS REPORTING.
NOW, THE F.B.I. THE YEAR BEFORE
LAST, WHEN OUR NUMBERS FIRST
STARTED COMING OUT, ACKNOWLEDGED
THAT THEY HAVE A PROBLEM WITH
THEIR DOCUMENTATION, AND THEY
HAVE MADE EFFORTS TO IMPROVE
THAT.
AND NEXT YEAR, THEY ARE PLANNING
TO LAUNCH NEW EFFORTS TO TRY TO
STREAMLINE THIS PROCESS AND HAVE
MORE ACCURATE INFORMATION.
>> Stewart: TWO FACTORS IN THIS
DATA THAT ARE WORTH DISCUSSION--
MENTAL ILLNESS AND DOMESTIC
DISTURBANCES.
WHAT DO THE DATA TELL YOU?
>> THE DATA TELLS US THAT THOSE
TWO THINGS YOU TALKED ABOUT ARE
SOME OF THE KEY INDICATORS OR
KEY THINGS THAT THE BUCKETS IN
WHICH PEOPLE WHO ARE KILLED BY
POLICE FALL INTO.
AND SO ONE IN FOUR OF THOSE
CASES ARE PEOPLE WHO WERE IN
SOME SORT OF MENTAL-- HAD MENTAL
ILLNESS OR WERE IN SOME SORT OF
MENTAL ILLNESS CRISIS.
AND THE SECOND BUCKET HAS NOT
BEEN REPORTED A LOT, BUT IT'S
THE SAME AS IT WAS ROUGHLY LAST
YEAR, WHICH IS, DOMESTIC
DISTURBANCES MAKE UP ABOUT ONE
IN SIX OF THOSE FATALITIES.
>> Stewart: A SMALL PERCENTAGE
OF THE PEOPLE WHO WERE SHOT AND
KILLED BY POLICE WERE UNARMED,
JUST 5%.
MOST HAD GUNS OR KNIVES.
SO WHAT DOES THIS TELL US ABOUT
LETHAL FORCE AND WHAT POLICE
FACE?
>> THERE ARE SOME DISPARITIES,
PARTICULARLY WHEN YOU LOOK AT
UNARMED.
AND THE UNARMED PERCENTAGE HAS
ACTUALLY GONE DOWN.
SO LAST YEAR WAS ABOUT 9% AND
THIS YEAR IS ABOUT 5%.
WHAT IT TELLS US, AT LEAST WHAT
THE EXPERTS TELL US IS THIS IS A
UNIVERSE OF PEOPLE WHO, WITH
DIFFERENT TRAINING, THROUGH
DE-ESCALATION, IF OFFICERS ARE
ABLE TO SLOW DOWN THE PROCESS,
THAT THESE ARE LIVES THAT MIGHT
BE SAVED.
AND SO, WHAT HAS HAPPENED THIS
YEAR IS A NEW TRAINING THAT WAS
DEBUTED A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO IN
NEW ORLEANS IN WHICH OFFICERS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY GATHERED FROM
160 DEPARTMENTS, AND THEY'RE
BEING TRAINED ON NEW TECHNIQUES
TO SLOW DOWN A SITUATION, TO
DE-ESCALATE SITUATIONS, AND THEY
BELIEVE THAT IF MORE POLICE
DEPARTMENTS ACROSS THE COUNTRY
EMPLOY THESE METHODS, THAT YOU
WOULD ACTUALLY SEE THE NUMBER OF
FATALITIES GO DOWN DRAMATICALLY.
SO THEY'RE ESTIMATING ABOUT 300
TO 400 OF THE FATALITIES, OF THE
1,000 PEOPLE KILLED THIS YEAR
MIGHT, PERHAPS, NOT HAPPEN IN
THE FUTURE WITH TECHNIQUES LIKE
THIS.
>> Stewart: KIMBRIELL KELLY OF
THE "WASHINGTON POST."
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: POST-TRAUMATIC
STRESS DISORDER, OR P.T.S.D.,
CAN AFFLICT ANYONE WHO
EXPERIENCES OR WITNESSES A
SHOCKING OR DANGEROUS EVENT.
IT'S PARTICULARLY COMMON AMONG
SOLDIERS WHO'VE BEEN IN COMBAT.
AND NOW, ONE JOURNALIST IS
SHARING HIS STORY ABOUT HOW
COVERING SHOCKING AND DANGEROUS
EVENTS LED TO HIS PERSONAL
BATTLE WITH P.T.S.D.
DEAN YATES, A NEWS EDITOR FOR
REUTERS, COVERED STORIES
INCLUDING THE WAR IN IRAQ AND A
MAJOR TERRORIST ATTACK AND
TSUNAMI IN INDONESIA.
OVER TIME, HIS FAMILY BEGAN TO
NOTICE A CHANGE IN HIS
PERSONALITY.
AFTER DENYING HE HAD A PROBLEM
FOR YEARS, HE FACED UP TO HIS
ISSUES AND CHECKED INTO A
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL.
YATES TOLD HIS OWN STORY IN THE
ARTICLE, "THE ROAD TO WARD 17:
MY BATTLE WITH P.T.S.D.," AND I
SPOKE WITH HIM RECENTLY VIA
SKYPE FROM HIS HOME ON THE
AUSTRALIAN ISLAND OF TASMANIA.
YOU COVERED MAJOR EVENTS ALL
THROUGH THE 2000s.
WHICH ONES STAND OUT TO YOU, AND
TELL US A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT
WHAT IT WAS LIKE TO BE A
REPORTER COVERING THESE MAJOR
EVENTS IN THE WORLD?
>> I THINK, ALISON, FOR ME, TWO
REALLY STAND OUT.
THE FIRST WAS THE BOXING DAY
TSUNAMI IN INDONESIA'S ACEH
PROVINCE AT THE END OF 2004.
THIS WAS A NATURAL CATASTROPHE
ON A SCALE THAT NO ONE HAS EVER
SEEN BEFORE.
IN INDONESIA'S ACEH PROVINCE
ALONE, 160,000 PEOPLE WERE
KILLED IN THE SPACE OF 20
MINUTES.
I SAW WHAT I BELIEVE WAS
THOUSANDS OF BODIES DURING THE
MONTH I SPENT THERE.
THE DESTRUCTION WAS JUST
UNIMAGINABLE, THE SUFFERING, THE
SURVIVORS-- YOU CAN JUST IMAGINE
THE SHOCK THESE PEOPLE WERE IN.
AND THE OTHER STORY FOR ME WAS,
OBVIOUSLY, THE IRAQ WAR.
I WAS THE REUTERS BUREAU CHIEF
IN IRAQ FROM 2007-2008.
AND AS YOU PROBABLY REMEMBER,
2007 WAS THE YEAR OF THE-- THE
YEAR OF THE SURGE.
THERE WERE EXTRA AMERICAN TROOPS
SENT TO IRAQ, AND THE VIOLENCE
IN THE FIRST SIX MONTHS OF 2007
WAS THE WORST IN THE ENTIRE IRAQ
WAR.
AND DURING THAT TIME, IN JULY OF
2007, VERY TRAGICALLY, WE LOST
THREE STAFF FROM THE REUTERS
TEAM, TWO KILLED BY A U.S.
APACHE HELICOPTER, AND ANOTHER,
A TRANSLATOR, WHO WAS KILLED BY
GUNMEN IN THE STREETS OF
BAGHDAD, WHICH WAS A VERY
TRAUMATIC TIME FOR MYSELF AND
FOR ALL OUR STAFF.
AND, OF COURSE, THE FAMILIES OF
THOSE MEN.
>> Stewart: WHEN DID YOU KNOW
THAT THIS WENT PAST HAVING AN
EMOTIONAL REACTION TO SOMETHING,
EVEN THOUGH WE'RE ALL REPORTERS
AND WE'RE THERE TO DO ANALYSIS
AND REPORT THE FACTS, WHEN DID
YOU KNOW THAT THOSE KIND OF MORE
NORMAL FEELINGS WERE MORPHING
INTO SOMETHING ELSE?
>> ALISON, TO BE HONEST, I
DIDN'T-- I WAS IN DENIAL FOR
YEARS THAT I HAD A PROBLEM.
I WAS IN DENIAL THAT I WAS
EXHIBITING SYMPTOMS OF P.T.S.D.,
AND MY SENSITIVITY TO NOISE, MY
AGITATION, MY ANXIETY.
THESE SYMPTOMS MEANT THAT I HAD
A MEDICAL ISSUE.
IT REALLY WASN'T UNTIL WITH MY
RELATIONSHIP WITH MY WIFE AT
BREAKING POINT EARLIER THIS YEAR
THAT I AGREED TO SEE A
PSYCHIATRIST WHO DIAGNOSED ME
WITH P.T.S.D.
AND IT WAS THAT MOMENT THAT I
CAME TO THE ACCEPTANCE THAT I
HAD P.T.S.D.
>> Stewart: THERE WAS ONE
INCIDENT IN IRAQ WHERE
COLLEAGUES OF YOURS WERE KILLED,
AND YOU HAD TO ABSORB IT AS A
REPORTER, BUT THAT IT MAY HAVE
BEEN A TRIGGER FOR YOU?
CAN YOU TELL US A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THAT SITUATION?
>> AS THE BUREAU CHIEF, I WAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR EVERYONE'S
SAFETY, OF COURSE, AND WHEN-- SO
WE HAD THREE STAFF KILLED IN TWO
DAYS.
THE TRANSLATOR, IT WAS JUST A
RANDOM ATTACK, A GUNMAN ON THE
STREETS.
THERE WAS REALLY NOT A LOT I
COULD DO ABOUT THAT ONE.
BUT THE OTHER TWO, THEY'D GONE
TO JUST INVESTIGATE REPORTS THAT
THERE HAD BEEN A U.S. AIRSTRIKE
ON BUILDINGS IN EAST BAGHDAD AND
THEY FOUND THEMSELVES IN A GROUP
OF MEN, SOME OF WHOM APPEARED TO
BE ARMED, AND THEY WERE ATTACKED
BY A U.S. APACHE HELICOPTER AND
WERE KILLED, ALONG WITH MOST OF
THE MEN IN THAT-- IN THAT GROUP.
AND THAT WAS JUST-- I CAN'T
EXPLAIN HOW DIFFICULT THAT WAS.
IT WAS, OBVIOUSLY, A STORY AT
THE TIME, AND SO, I WAS-- I WAS
HAVING TO WRITE THE STORY OF
THEIR DEATHS AND I WAS
INVESTIGATING HOW IT HAPPENED,
WHAT HAPPENED.
I WAS, OBVIOUSLY, DEALING WITH
THE U.S. MILITARY BECAUSE IT WAS
ONE OF THEIR HELICOPTERS.
AND THEN THERE WAS THE GRIEF
WITHIN THE BAGHDAD OFFICE.
IT WAS JUST ENORMOUS.
THERE WAS SO MUCH ANGUISH.
AND WE HAD TO-- OBVIOUSLY, THERE
WERE THE FUNERALS THAT HAD TO BE
ORGANIZED AND IT WAS-- IT WAS
JUST A VERY-- IT WAS THE MOST
DIFFICULT PERIOD OF MY LIFE,
THOSE FEW DAYS, AND THEN WEEKS,
IN THE AFTERMATH OF THEIR
DEATHS.
AND AS TIME WENT ON IN IRAQ,
WHILE I WORKED THERE, I TRIED TO
JUST BURY THESE THOUGHTS AND
EMOTIONS.
AND OVER TIME, I THINK I
SUCCESSFULLY COMPARTMENTALIZED
THAT, BUT IT EVENTUALLY CAME
BACK TO HAUNT ME AND WAS REALLY
ONE OF THE MAJOR TRIGGERS, I
THINK, FOR MY P.T.S.D.
>> Stewart: NOW, THAT ATTACK
WAS RELEASED BY WIKILEAKS.
SO YOU HAD REPEATED EXPOSURE TO
IT BECAUSE YOU COULD SEE IT
HAPPEN, RIGHT?
>> THAT'S RIGHT, ALISON.
AND I THINK FOR ME, ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT I FEEL IS A DEEP
SENSE OF GUILT AND SHAME BECAUSE
WHEN THAT WIKILEAKS-- WHEN
WIKILEAKS RELEASED THAT VIDEO IN
APRIL 2010, I WAS ACTUALLY ON
HOLIDAY IN TASMANIA AT THE TIME,
WHERE I LIVE NOW, AND I KNEW
JUST ABOUT-- MORE ABOUT THAT
INCIDENT THAN ANYONE, AND YET, I
JUST WAS SO-- SO FROZEN.
I WAS SO SHOCKED TO SEE THAT, TO
SEE THAT COME OUT.
IT WAS AN-- IT WAS IN A
NEWSPAPER.
I PICKED UP A NEWSPAPER, AND
THERE IT WAS SPREAD ACROSS A
COUPLE OF PAGES.
I JUST WENT INTO I GUESS SHUT
DOWN, LOCKDOWN.
I JUST DIDN'T WANT TO HAVE
ANYTHING TO DO WITH IT.
I WANTED OTHERS TO DEAL WITH
WHAT WAS A MAJOR GLOBAL STORY AT
THE TIME BECAUSE THIS WAS THE
FIRST TIME REALLY ANYONE HAD
HEARD OF WIKILEAKS.
AND TO THIS DAY I JUST FEEL VERY
GUILTY ABOUT THAT, BECAUSE I
COULD HAVE ADDED REALLY
IMPORTANT CONTEXT, I THINK, INTO
WHAT HAPPENED THAT DAY IN 2007,
AND DURING THE AFTERMATH, AS
WELL, WHEN WE WERE PURSUING THE
U.S. MILITARY-- WE WANTED THAT
TAPE.
WE WERE FILING FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION REQUESTS TO THE U.S.
MILITARY.
THEY NEVER GAVE US THE TAPE.
>> Stewart: KNOWING NOW WHAT
YOU KNOW ABOUT P.T.S.D. AND
ABOUT YOUR OWN HEALTH, WERE
THERE TIMES WHEN THE P.T.S.D.
KEPT YOU FROM DOING YOUR JOB IN
THE WAY YOU WANTED TO DO YOUR
JOB?
>> I THINK IN THE LAST COUPLE OF
YEARS, CERTAINLY.
THERE WERE TIMES I COULDN'T GET
OUT OF BED.
I WOULD BE SO DEPRESSED, I WOULD
LIE IN BED AND I BARELY HAD
ENOUGH STRENGTH TO SEND AN EMAIL
TO MY-- TO MY BOSS AT THE TIME
AND SAY, "LOOK, I JUST CAN'T-- I
CAN'T GET OUT OF BED.
I CAN'T WORK TODAY."
AND IF I GOT REALLY STRESSED, I
WOULD ACTUALLY-- IT WOULD FEEL
LIKE I WAS BACK IN MY OFFICE
IN IRAQ.
I'D FEEL LIKE I WAS TRANSPORTED
BACK TO THAT PLACE.
AND WHEN I GOT STRESSED, I WOULD
JUST REACT VERY BADLY.
I WOULD BANG MY FISTS ON THE
TABLE.
I WOULD SHOUT.
AND I LOOK BACK NOW AND I THINK
I JUST WISH I'D TAKEN MUCH MORE
NOTICE OF THOSE SYMPTOMS AND
BEEN WILLING TO ACCEPT THAT I
HAD A PROBLEM.
>> Stewart: AT ONE POINT, YOU
TRIED TO HEAL YOURSELF.
YOU WOULD GO ON LONG WALKS, ON
THESE LONG HIKES, BUT YOU HAVE
SINCE LEARNED THAT THAT
PROBABLY, THE BEHAVIOR YOU WERE
EXHIBITING REALLY WASN'T SAFE
BEHAVIOR.
TELL US A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT
THAT.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT MY
PSYCHIATRIST SUGGESTED TO ME WAS
TO DO A LITTLE BIT OF BUSH
WALKING, GET OUT INTO NATURE.
AND, OF COURSE, TASMANIA HAS
SOME OF THE WORLD'S MOST
INCREDIBLE RAINFORESTS.
SO I DID.
I TOOK THAT ADVICE, AND I WOULD
GO ON SOME NICE DAY HIKES AND I
REALLY ENJOYED THAT.
AND THEN AFTER A COUPLE OF
MONTHS AFTER BEING DIAGNOSED, I
STARTED TO DO SOME MULTI-DAY
WALKS, STAYED OUT IN THE
RAINFOREST, STAY IN CAVERNS,
THAT SORT OF THING.
AND I REALLY FOUND PEACE IN THE
RAINFOREST.
IT WAS WHERE MY MIND WAS STILL.
I COULD BREATHE.
I COULD JUST LEAVE ALL OF THAT
EMOTIONAL BAGGAGE AT HOME AND
JUST LOOK AT THE TREES, WALK
THESE BEAUTIFUL TRAILS AND FEEL
REALLY, REALLY AT PEACE.
BUT WITH P.T.S.D., ONE OF THE
SYMPTOMS IS RISK-TAKING
BEHAVIOR.
AND IT GOT TO THE POINT WHERE I
WAS PLANNING MULTI-DAY HIKES, UP
TO A WEEK, A WEEK'S WALKS,
THROUGH SOME PRETTY ROUGH
TERRAIN IN TASMANIA ON MY OWN,
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE WINTER.
AND MY WIFE WAS WORRIED ABOUT
IT.
MY FATHER-IN-LAW GAVE ME A
PERSONAL LOCATER BEACON TO SAY,
LOOK-- HE SAID, "YOU REALLY
SHOULD CONSIDER THIS BECAUSE IT
IS QUITE DANGEROUS."
>> Stewart: BEING A JOURNALIST
CAN BE A VERY STRESSFUL
POSITION.
DO YOU PLAN TO STAY IN IT AS
YOUR CAREER?
AND WHAT'S NEXT FOR YOU?
>> I THINK WE HAVE AN
OBLIGATION AS JOURNALISTS TO
TALK ABOUT MENTAL HEALTH ISSUE
BECAUSE I THINK WE'RE UNIQUELY
EQUIPPED TO COMMUNICATE WHAT
IT'S LIKE TO LIVE WITH MENTAL
ILLNESS.
AND I THINK AS-- I THINK IT'S
JUST SOMETHING-- IT'S SOMETHING
I WOULD LIKE TO REALLY DO.
AND IN FACT, I HAVE A FACEBOOK
PAGE-- I'VE ONLY JUST RECENTLY
REACTIVATED -- BUT I'M POSTING
THE STORIES THAT OTHER
JOURNALISTS HAVE WRITTEN ABOUT
THEIR MENTAL ILLNESS ON THAT
PAGE, BECAUSE I JUST THINK WE
NEED TO DO WHAT WE CAN TO RAISE
AWARENESS AND BREAK DOWN THE
STIGMA THAT STILL SURROUNDS
MENTAL ILLNESS.
>> Stewart: DEAN YATES, A
REPORTER WITH REUTERS, THANK YOU
SO MUCH FOR SHARING YOUR STORY
AND BEING SO CANDID.
>> MY PLEASURE, ALISON.
>> Stewart: IN THE PAST DECADE,
COMPANIES LIKE 23andMe AND
ancestry.com, WHICH OFFER D.N.A.
TESTING TO HELP PEOPLE LEARN
MORE ABOUT THEIR BIOLOGICAL
TRAITS, HAVE BOOMED.
AFRICAN-AMERICANS ARE
INCREASINGLY USING THESE TESTS
TO EXPLORE THEIR GENEALOGY AND
ANSWER QUESTIONS ABOUT THEIR
FAMILY HISTORIES LOST DURING THE
TRANSATLANTIC SLAVE TRADE.
ALONDRA NELSON, DEAN OF SOCIAL
SCIENCE AND PROFESSOR OF
SOCIOLOGY AT COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY, LOOKS AT THE
INTERSECTION OF D.N.A. AND
HISTORY IN HER BOOK "THE SOCIAL
LIFE OF D.N.A.: RACE,
REPARATIONS, AND RECONCILIATION
AFTER THE GENOME."
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S HARI
SREENIVASAN RECENTLY SPOKE WITH
NELSON.
>> Sreenivasan: FIRST OF ALL,
WHY ARE PEOPLE DOING IT?
IS IT FOR A STORY ABOUT
THEMSELVES?
>> THOSE THINGS ARE RELATED,
IDENTITIES AND STORIES, YOU
KNOW.
AND I THINK THAT PEOPLE WANT
IDENTITIES THAT THEY CAN USE TO
TELL A RICH STORY, OR A RICHER
STORY, ABOUT THEIR LIVES.
AND IN THE CASE OF AFRICAN
AMERICANS, PART OF THAT STORY
HAS BEEN LOST.
SO WHAT THE ATTEMPT TO USE
GENETIC ANCESTRY TESTING, TO
FIND A NATION STATE, ETHNIC
GROUP, INFORMATION THAT YOU
DIDN'T HAVE ACCESS TO
BEFORE, BEFORE WE HAD NEW
TECHNOLOGIES THAT HELPED US TO
MAKE SOME BEST GUESSES ABOUT
WHERE PEOPLE OF AFRICAN DESCENT
IN THE U.S. MIGHT BE FROM AND
THEN ALLOW YOU TO COMPLETE A
STORY.
SO THE IDENTITY PIECE AND STORY
PIECE ARE VERY MUCH CONNECTED.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE IS ALSO
A NOTION OF OWNERSHIP.
>> YES.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR A SECOND
THIS IS I AM OPTING INTO IT.
>> YES.
>> Sreenivasan: AND I OWN
THIS.
AND I WILL TAKE THIS PIECE OF
INFORMATION THAT I KNOW, AND I
HAVE THIS TO MYSELF.
>> THAT'S THE CRITICAL PIECE
BECAUSE WE KNOW FOR COMMUNITIES
OF COLOR THAT GENETICS HAS NOT
ALWAYS BEEN A ROSY SPACE OF
RESEARCH, AND THAT THERE HAVE
BEEN HISTORICAL TRAGEDIES IN THE
PAST THAT WOULD LEAD,
PARTICULARLY AFRICAN AMERICANS,
TO BE SUSPICIOUS OF GENETIC
TESTING.
AND SO THE ABILITY TO OPT IN,
THE ABILITY TO NOW IN THE
21st CENTURY USE GENETICS
TO DO SOMETHING POWERFUL, TO
TELL A POWERFUL STORY ABOUT YOUR
IDENTITY AND YOUR LIFE AND TO
CHOOSE HOW YOU WANT TO TAKE THAT
STORY UP.
SOMETIMES PEOPLE GET INFORMATION
THAT THEY FIND USEFUL OR
INTERESTING, AND SOMETIMES THEY
DON'T.
BUT BECAUSE YOU HAVE OPTED IN AS
A CONSUMER, YOU GET TO CHOOSE.
YOU GET TO ADJUDICATE WHETHER OR
NOT YOU THINK THAT INFORMATION
IS USEFUL FOR YOUR STORY.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DOES THIS
CHANGE OUR SENSE OF COMMUNITY OR
WHO I IDENTIFY WITH?
BECAUSE THIS MOMENT, I MIGHT BE
AFRICAN AMERICAN OR INDIAN
AMERICAN, BUT IF I REALLY GO
BACK THROUGH MY GENETIC ROOTS,
WAIT A MINUTE, I'M FROM THIS
COUNTRY, ALSO?
>> WE USE AFRICAN AMERICAN
SYNONYMOUSLY WITH THINGS LIKE
IRISH AMERICAN OR SCOTTISH
AMERICAN, BUT THOSE ARE
COUNTRIES, AND AFRICA --
>> AFRICA IS A CONTINENT.
>> AFRICA IS A CONTINENT, AND
THERE ARE 54 COUNTRIES ON THE
CONTINENT OF AFRICA.
TO BE ABLE TO SAY I'M
GUINEAN-AMERICAN, I'M
NIGERIAN-AMERICAN, IS ACTUALLY A
SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCE.
AND THAT ETHNIC STORY, BEING A
HYPHENATED AMERICAN IS REALLY
PART OF THE AMERICAN STORY.
IT'S HOW POLITICS HAPPENED.
IT'S HOW WE DO FORMS OF SOCIAL
AND COMMUNITY ORGANIZING.
SO IT ADDS A LEVEL OF
SPECIFICITY FOR AFRICAN
AMERICANS THAT MIGHT NOT
HAVE BEEN THERE BEFORE.
>> REGARDLESS OF WHICH
COMMUNITIES DECIDED TO DO
THIS FOR THEMSELVES, ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT CONCERNS ME IS WHERE
DOES THAT INFORMATION RESIDE?
AFTER THEY DO THE TEST, AFTER
THEY GET MY GENETIC CHEEK SWAB,
AND AFTER THAT LAB FIGURES OUT
WHAT IT IS ABOUT MY STORY TO
TELL ME, THEY HAVE A COPY OF MY
D.N.A. IN THEIR LAB, AND I
PROBABLY PRESSED "I AGREE"
WITHOUT READING THE FINE PRINT.
>> DIFFERENT COMPANIES DO
DIFFERENT THINGS.
SO, WE NOW KNOW THAT 23andMe HAS
COMMITTED TO DOING
PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH AND
AGGREGATING THEIR DATA FOR
POTENTIALLY DRUG PATENTS AND
THESE SORTS OF THINGS.
IN THEIR FINE PRINT IT TELLS YOU
THAT.
COMPANIES LIKE AFRICAN ANCESTRY,
THE ONE I SPENT A LOT OF TIME
WRITING ABOUT, SAYS THEY THROW
OUT THE SAMPLE.
BUT, YOU KNOW, THERE'S A WAY IN
WHICH DATA LIVES FOREVER.
SO EVEN IF YOU THROW OUT THE
ACTUAL TISSUE, THE SALIVA, THE
DATA CAN STILL INFORM.
AND ALL OF THE COMPANIES, I
THINK, IF THEY'RE SMART, ARE
USING THE DATA THAT COMES IN
FROM CUSTOMERS TO MAKE THEIR
DATABASES MORE ROBUST.
YOU CAN GET MORE ROBUST FINDINGS
IF YOU HAVE MORE EXPANSIVE
DATABASES.
IT'S ON THE COMPANY-TO-COMPANY
BASIS THAT WE KNOW WHAT HAPPENS
TO THE D.N.A. BUT WE CAN SUSPECT
IT'S BEING KEPT AROUND, SIMILAR
TO WHEN ONE GOES TO THE HOSPITAL
AND HAS TO GIVE-- IS HAVING AN
OPERATION OR HAS TO GIVE A
TISSUE SAMPLE AROUND.
>> THE BOOK IS CALLED "THE
SOCIAL LIFE OF D.N.A.: RACE,
REPARATIONS AND RECONCILIATION
AFTER THE GENOME."
ALONDRA NELSON, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Stewart: TO LEARN MORE ABOUT
HOW D.N.A. TESTS HELP AFRICAN
AMERICANS UNDERSTAND THEIR
CONNECTIONS TO THE TRANSATLANTIC
SLAVE TRADE, VISIT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: AND NOW TO "VIEWERS
LIKE YOU," YOUR CHANCE TO
COMMENT ON SEGMENTS YOU'VE SEEN
HERE ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
WE BROUGHT YOU THE STORY OF
AMERICA'S FIRST OFFSHORE WIND
FARM, WHOSE TURBINES STARTED
SPINNING OFF THE COAST OF RHODE
ISLAND EARLIER THIS MONTH.
WHILE THE PROJECT IS SMALL, IT
COULD HAVE LARGE IMPLICATIONS
FOR AMERICA'S SUPPLY OF CLEAN
ENERGY.
MANY OF YOU EXPRESSED
FRUSTRATION THAT OFFSHORE WIND
POWER HAS TAKEN SO LONG TO
ARRIVE HERE IN THE UNITED
STATES.
LARRY RICHMOND SAID: "IT'S
ABSURD THAT IT'S TAKEN US THIS
LONG.
THIS IS A NO-BRAINER AND SHOULD
BE A NATIONAL PRIORITY."
FRED KRASS ADDED, "CRAZY WE ARE
SO FAR BEHIND EUROPE ON THIS.
PEOPLE SAY THEY WANT ENERGY
INDEPENDENCE, WHAT BETTER WAY TO
REACH THIS GOAL."
JAMES SEES EMPATHIZED WITH
RESIDENTS WHO CONSIDER THE
WINDMILLS EYESORES: "I WOULDN'T
WANT A HYDROELECTRIC DAM, SOLAR
FARM, OR LEAST OF ALL A NUCLEAR
POWER PLANT IN MY BACKYARD
EITHER, BUT UNTIL WE CAN START
HARNESSING COLD FUSION IN OUR
BASEMENTS, WE HAVE TO HAVE LARGE
POWER PRODUCTION FACILITIES
SOMEWHERE."
BORDER LORD ADDED: "MANY PEOPLE
PURCHASE OCEANFRONT PROPERTY FOR
THE UNOBSTRUCTED VIEWS, AS DO
MANY WHO PURCHASE HOMES IN THE
MOUNTAINS.
OTHERS TRAVEL GREAT DISTANCES TO
VACATION IN PLACES WHERE
TECHNOLOGY DOES NOT INTRUDE ON
THEIR ENJOYMENT OF NATURE."
ELLEN DAWSON HAD SOME QUESTIONS:
"CAN ANYONE POINT ME TO
STUDIES OF HOW, OR WHETHER, THIS
PROPOSED WIND FARM WILL AFFECT
MIGRATING MAMMALS THAT USE SONAR
TO NAVIGATE?
OR HOW, OR WHETHER, VIBRATIONS
RESONATING DOWN THE POSTS AND
INTO THE SEA BED CREATE STRESS
IN THE FAUNA OF THE SURROUNDING
HABITATS?"
AND FINALLY, THIS FROM JACKSON
MARSHALL: "I THINK THEY ARE
UGLY."
AS ALWAYS, WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS AT pbs.org/newshour, ON
OUR FACEBOOK PAGE, OR ON TWITTER
@NEWSHOUR.
>> Stewart: THE CHINESE-AMERICAN
ARTIST WHOSE DEER PAINTINGS
INSPIRED THE FILM "BAMBI" HAS
DIED.
TYRUS WONG'S PAINTINGS IMPRESSED
WALT DISNEY, WHO PRODUCED THE
ANIMATED FILM IN 1942.
TYRUS WONG WAS 106 YEARS OLD.
AND FINALLY AS THE YEAR COMES TO
A CLOSE, NORTHERN MICHIGAN'S
LAKE SUPERIOR STATE UNIVERSITY
HAS RELEASED ITS ANNUAL LIST OF
WORDS THAT SHOULD BE BANISHED
FOR MISUSE OR OVERUSE.
THE 2017 LIST INCLUDES ECHO
CHAMBER, GUESSTIMATE, DAD-BOD,
LISTICLE, AND POST-TRUTH.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT, AND HAPPY NEW YEAR.